.. meta::
   :description: This section provides an overview of license management
                 in ThinLinc, including license counting, file handling,
                 and monitoring.

.. _licensehandling:

License handling
================

Overview
--------

To run a session against a ThinLinc cluster, the server must be equipped
with license files. The license files specify the number of concurrent
users the cluster is allowed to run.

If no license files are installed on the cluster, a maximum of ten
concurrent users are allowed.

Each cluster can have one or several license files. Each file contains
licenses for a specific number of concurrent users. When the VSM Server
starts up, it reads all license files and creates a sum of the number of
concurrent users allowed based on the licenses from all files.

License files have one soft and one hard limit. When the soft limit is
reached, new sessions can still be started, but a license violation will
be logged and sent to the administrator (see
:ref:`licensekeys_logemail`). If however the hard limit has been
reached, new sessions cannot be started. The purpose of this system is
to allow growing organizations some time to adapt the number of licenses
to a growing number of concurrent sessions, avoiding loss of production.

License counting
----------------

One license is required for each pair of (**username**,
**client hardware**). This means that if a user runs several sessions
from the same client, only one license is used. If the same user runs
multiple concurrent sessions from different client hardware, multiple
licenses are required by the user.

Location and format of license files
------------------------------------

License files are delivered either in the form of text files (filename
extension :file:`.license`) or ZIP files (filename extension
:file:`.zip`). Transfer each file to your ThinLinc master server and
place it in :file:`/opt/thinlinc/etc/licenses`. Make sure that the
transfer of the files uses binary mode, or the license file might not be
verifiable. We recommend transferring via SCP or SFTP.

After adding new license files, either restart VSM Server by running
:command:`/bin/systemctl restart vsmserver` or wait until the VSM Server
automatically reads in the new licenses, something that happens once
every 12 hours.

.. note::

   When running VSM Server in a high availability setup (see :ref:`HA`),
   license files should be copied to :file:`/opt/thinlinc/etc/licenses`
   on both nodes.

.. _licensekeys_logemail:

Log files and e-mail messages
-----------------------------

ThinLinc logs user license violations to the file
:file:`/var/log/thinlinc-user-licenses`. Other license-related messages
are logged to :file:`/var/log/vsmserver.log`.

If license violations occur, ThinLinc sends email to the person defined
as system administrator in the parameter
:servconf:`/vsmserver/admin_email` in :file:`vsmserver.hconf`. E-mail
messages warning about license violations are sent every 12 hours if any
license violations have occurred.

Checking the number of valid licenses
-------------------------------------

You can use the program :program:`/opt/thinlinc/sbin/tl-show-licenses`
to verify the number of valid user licenses. There is also a graph
available in the administrative interface. See :ref:`tlwebadm_status`
for more information.
