.. meta::
   :description: Explanation of the printer access control feature in
                 ThinLinc, which manages and restricts user access to
                 printers based on terminal location within a ThinLinc
                 cluster. This section covers configuration
                 requirements, activation steps, and considerations for
                 handling unknown terminals.

.. _printeraccesscontrol:

Printer access control
----------------------

In a ThinLinc cluster, all printers that any user of the cluster needs
to be able to print to must be defined centrally, or the user will not
be able to print from applications that run in a ThinLinc session. For
large installations, this leads to a very long list of available
printers.

A long list of printers leads to usability problems --- having to a
select printer from a long list can be troublesome. Also, it opens for
problems with printer jobs being printed at remote locations by mistake
(or on purpose, by users finding it amusing to send "messages" to other
locations).

The solution to this problem is the printer access control feature of
ThinLinc. By integrating with CUPS (the Common Unix Printing System),
the list of printers a user is presented with and allowed to print to is
limited to the printers that should be available to a specific terminal,
based on information in a database of printers, terminals and locations.

.. note::

   The printer access control feature will affect all users on the
   ThinLinc cluster. The only user excepted from limitations of the
   printer list is the superuser (root) --- all other users will only
   see and be able to use printers based on the location of their
   terminals, when the printer access control feature is enabled.

Theory of operation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each time a user requests a new session or reconnects to an existing
session, the hardware (MAC) address of the terminal is sent along with
the request from the ThinLinc client. Using the same database as the
*nearest printer* feature used to find which printer is closest to the
user, the printer access control feature calculates which printers the
user is allowed to use, and then configures the access control of the
printing system (CUPS).

This way, the user is presented with a list of printers that only
contains the printers relevant for the location where the terminal the
user is currently using is located. In a situation where a user has
multiple sessions running from multiple clients, all printers associated
with the different terminals will be made available.

Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  CUPS v1.2 or higher.

Activating the printer access control feature
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, make sure you have configured the printers in your ThinLinc
cluster as documented in :ref:`printing_config_overview`. For the
printer access control feature, a central CUPS daemon on the VSM Server
host is required, and all agent hosts must have a correctly configured
:file:`/etc/cups/client.conf`.

To activate the printer access feature, create two symlinks on the host
running VSM Server, as follows:

.. code:: console

   $ sudo ln -s /opt/thinlinc/sbin/tl-limit-printers \
      /opt/thinlinc/etc/sessionstartup.d
   $ sudo ln -s /opt/thinlinc/sbin/tl-limit-printers \
      /opt/thinlinc/etc/sessionreconnect.d

The first symlink makes sure :program:`tl-limit-printers` is run when
sessions are started. The second makes sure it is run at reconnects to
existing sessions. More details about the session startup can be found
in :ref:`configuration_customizing_user_session`.

.. note::

   With the above configuration (symlinking :program:`tl-limit-printers`
   into :file:`sessionstartup.d` and :file:`sessionreconnect.d`), the
   client will not get an answer back from the server until
   :program:`tl-limit-printers` has finished its execution. This is the
   desired behavior if it is strictly necessary that printer access
   rights are correct when the user connects to the session. In
   environments where it is acceptable that the final list of printers
   shown to the user may not be finished when the user connects to the
   session, place the execution of :program:`tl-limit-printers` in the
   background, as detailed in
   :ref:`configuration_scripts_startup_reconnect`, as that will decrease
   the time the user has to wait for the session to appear on his client.

After creating the symlinks, try connecting to your ThinLinc cluster
with a ThinLinc client and bring up an application that lists the
available printers. The list of printers should now be limited according
to configuration.

.. note::

   The printer list limitation doesn't work for applications that use
   the deprecated "cupsGetPrinters" library call. This means that older
   applications might show the whole list of printers. The access
   control is still enforced, which means that even if a disallowed
   printer is shown in the list of printers, users can't submit jobs to
   it.

   Most applications in a modern Linux distribution doesn't have this
   problem.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Configuration of the printer access control feature is mostly a matter
of using tlwebadm (see :ref:`tlwebadm_locations` for details) to add the
hardware address of all terminals as well as information about where
they are located and which printers are to be available for each
location.

Unknown terminals / terminals without hardware address
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a client reports a hardware address that is not present in the
database of terminals, or when no hardware address is reported, the
default behavior is to disallow access to all printers, rendering an
empty printer list for the user.

There is however a way to give even unknown terminals access to one or
more printers --- define a special location and enable the
:guilabel:`Use for unknown terminals` switch. Then add the printers that
should be available for the unknown terminals.

One common configuration is to add such a location and then add the
**thinlocal** printer to this location. This way, unknown terminals, for
example people working from their home computers, will be able to user
their locally connected printer, but no other printer will be available.
