.. meta::
   :description: Explore tips and tricks for using the ThinLinc desktop
                 customizer (TLDC) with KDE, including solving unwanted
                 icons, file associations, and fixing the home icon.

Tips & tricks with TLDC
-----------------------

.. _tldc_unwanted_icons:

Unwanted icons on the desktop with KDE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At first login for each user, KDE copies files from
:file:`/usr/share/apps/kdesktop/DesktopLinks` to the :file:`Desktop`
directory of the user. This means that if there is a :file:`Home Icon`
in :file:`DesktopLinks` and you add a :file:`Home Icon` via TLDC, there
will be two :file:`Home Icon`.

Remove the contents of :file:`/usr/share/apps/kdesktop/DesktopLinks` to
solve the problem, and let TLDC be the sole provider of icons on the
desktop.

.. note::

   If your KDE is based somewhere else than under :file:`/usr`, the
   :file:`DesktopLinks` directory will be situated elsewhere. For
   example, on SUSE, KDE is based at :file:`/opt/kde3`.

.. _tldc_file_associations:

File associations in KDE for applications not in the menu
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When KDE tries to determine what application to use for opening a
specific file, it is only looking for applications that are available in
the menu. There are cases where not all applications that may be used
for opening files are meant to be available in the menu.

In this case, create a hidden menu by setting :guilabel:`Hide this menu`
to :guilabel:`Yes` in the menu structure editor, and then create an
application group that adds the applications that should be available
for file associations in to this menu.

.. _tldc_kde_home_icon:

Home icon not working in KDE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is a case of the problem above where file associations are not
working. Create an application group that includes the Konqueror
("kde-kfmclient_dir") application in a hidden menu, and make sure this
application group is added for all relevant users, and the home icon
will work again.

.. note::

   A menu named **Hidden Menu** is created by the application group
   **Hidden** which is by default activated for the Profile **kde**.
   This menu contains **kde-kcmclient_dir** to make sure the home icon
   is working. Make sure this application group is activated for all
   users with a desktop based on KDE.
