.. meta::
   :description: Guide to managing subclusters, master, and agent
                 services in the VSM module of ThinLinc's web
                 administration interface, including configuration and
                 service management.

.. _tlwebadm_vsm:

The VSM module
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

VSM contains information about subclusters and master and agent
services. This module also allows managing of subclusters and
configuration of master and agent.

-  :guilabel:`Subclusters` allows viewing, adding, modifying or deleting
   subclusters.

-  :guilabel:`Master` allows starting or stopping the **vsmserver**
   service, and modifying a subset of the configuration options.

-  :guilabel:`Agent` allows starting or stopping the **vsmagent**
   service, and modifying a subset of the configuration options.

.. _tlwebadm_vsm_subclusters:

Subclusters
^^^^^^^^^^^

On this page, the configured subclusters of the ThinLinc master can be
found. Subclusters are groups of agents that can be associated with
users or groups. Adding, modifying or deleting existing subclusters is
possible. A restart of the **vsmserver** service is required after
changes to subcluster configuration in order for the changes to take
effect. The **vsmserver** service can be restarted from the
:guilabel:`Master` page described in :ref:`tlwebadm_vsm_master`.

The page will present a list of currently configured subclusters. This
should be something like the example in
:numref:`tlwebadm_subcluster_list`. To edit a subcluster, click on its
name in the list.

.. _tlwebadm_subcluster_list:

.. figure:: images/tlwebadm-subcluster-list.svg

   Subclusters

:numref:`tlwebadm_subcluster_list` shows a system with a total of two
subclusters. The subcluster called :guilabel:`default` is configured
with two agent servers and :guilabel:`US_cluster` is configured with one
agent.

To add a new subcluster to the list, press the :guilabel:`Add new
subcluster` button. This will bring up an empty subcluster edit pop-up.
See figure :numref:`tlwebadm_subcluster_new` for an example.

.. _tlwebadm_subcluster_new:

.. figure:: images/tlwebadm-subcluster-new.svg

   New subcluster pop-up

There are five editable fields in this view: :guilabel:`Subcluster`,
:guilabel:`Agents`, :guilabel:`Users`, :guilabel:`Groups` and
:guilabel:`Limit sessions`. The first field controls the name of the
subcluster. The rest are described in
:ref:`configuration_subcluster_params`. To save changes, press the
:guilabel:`Save` button. Remember to restart the **vsmserver** service
afterward.

.. _tlwebadm_vsm_master:

Master
^^^^^^

On this page you can start or stop the master service. There are also a
subset of configuration options available for configuration of the
service.

-  :guilabel:`Service status` gives you the ability to start or stop the
   master service.

-  :guilabel:`Sessions per user` allows you to configure how many
   sessions are allowed per user.

   A value of zero means no limit and will give unlimited sessions per
   user.

-  :guilabel:`Allowed groups` allows you to configure which groups
   should be given access to connect to ThinLinc.

   If no groups are specified, all users will have access to connect to
   ThinLinc

-  :guilabel:`Allowed shadowers` allows you to configure which users
   should be able to shadow other ThinLinc sessions.

Click the :guilabel:`Save` button when you want to save your changes to
the configuration files.

.. note::

   You need to restart the service to apply your changes.

.. _tlwebadm_vsm_agent:

Agent
^^^^^

On this page you can start or stop the agent service. There are also a
subset of configuration options available for configuration of the
service.

-  :guilabel:`Service status` gives you the ability to start or stop the
   agent service.

-  :guilabel:`Externally reachable address to use` allows you to
   configure the hostname that clients are redirected to.

   .. note::

      This configuration is needed if running ThinLinc in a NAT
      environment. See :ref:`network_nat` for more information.

-  :guilabel:`Extra arguments to X server` allows you to configure
   additional arguments to the X server (:program:`Xvnc`) for new
   sessions that are started.

Click the :guilabel:`Save` button when you want to save your changes to
the configuration files.

.. note::

   You need to restart the service to apply your changes.
