.. meta::
   :description: Guide to managing terminal and printer locations in the
                 ThinLinc web administration interface, including
                 adding, editing, and assigning devices to locations.

.. _tlwebadm_locations:

The locations module
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Locations contains information about locations where terminals and
printers reside. A location can be a room, a floor, a house or some
other type of geographical delimitation.

Every terminal should be assigned as a member of a location. In addition
to terminals, printers may also be assigned to locations.

Locations
^^^^^^^^^

To edit a location, click on its name in the list. To add a new location
to the list you press the :guilabel:`Add new location` button. This will
bring up an empty location edit pop-up. See
:numref:`tlwebadm_location_new` for an example.

.. _tlwebadm_location_new:

.. figure:: images/tlwebadm-location-new.svg

   New location pop-up

Fill the :guilabel:`Name` and :guilabel:`Description` fields with
relevant information. Enable the switch if this location is to be used
as a default location for unknown terminals when using the printer
access control feature (see :ref:`printeraccesscontrol` for details).

To save changes, press the :guilabel:`Save` button. When you have
pressed the :guilabel:`Save` button you will see that the
:guilabel:`Name` field will change from being an editable field to
become a static text label. To assure data integrity between the modules
you aren't allowed to change the name of an item after it's added.

The :guilabel:`Delete` button deletes the currently viewed location, but
only if the confirmation checkbox is also checked. The :guilabel:`Add
printer` button will add a new field to the pop-up, a drop-down menu with
all possible printers. An example of this can be seen in
:numref:`tlwebadm_location_addprinter`.

.. _tlwebadm_location_addprinter:

.. figure:: images/tlwebadm-location-addprinter.svg

   Location details with printer

The :guilabel:`Printer` field above has the printer :guilabel:`MX-2700N`
selected. Remember to save the changes if you change printer! You can
assign more printers to this location by clicking :guilabel:`Add
printer` again to bring up another printer line. To remove a printer
you select the :guilabel:`Delete` checkbox corresponding to the
printer(s) you want to delete, and click :guilabel:`Save` to apply the
changes. The printer(s) will disappear.

.. note::

   Printers contains entries for all available printers. These entries
   are just shadows of the real CUPS (Common Unix Printing System)
   printer system entries. This means that you first need the printers
   to be installed in the CUPS printer system and then added to this
   list.

Terminals
^^^^^^^^^

Terminals contains necessary information about all terminals. The most
important information here is every terminal's interface hardware (MAC)
address.

Each terminal should be entered as described in this section. Enter the
terminals module by clicking on the menu item. You will be presented
with a list of currently entered terminals. This could be something like
the example in :numref:`tlwebadm_terminal_list`.

.. _tlwebadm_terminal_list:

.. figure:: images/tlwebadm-terminal-list.svg

   Terminals

:numref:`tlwebadm_terminal_list` shows a system with a total of two
terminals.

To edit a terminal, click on its name in the list. To add a new terminal
to the list you press the :guilabel:`Add new terminal` button. This will
bring up an empty terminal edit pop-up. See
:numref:`tlwebadm_terminal_new` for an example.

.. _tlwebadm_terminal_new:

.. figure:: images/tlwebadm-terminal-new.svg

   New terminal pop-up

There are three editable fields in this view, :guilabel:`Terminal name`,
:guilabel:`Hardware (MAC) address` and :guilabel:`Location`. They are
described in :ref:`tlwebadm_terminal_properties` below.

To save changes, press the :guilabel:`Save` button. When you have
pressed the :guilabel:`Save` button you will see that the Hardware (MAC)
address field will change from being an editable field to become a
static text label. To assure data integrity between the modules you
aren't allowed to change this field after it's added.

When a new terminal is requested or when clicking an existing one in the
terminals list, there will be three buttons in the pop-up. The
:guilabel:`Save` button is used to save changes made to the terminal.
The :guilabel:`Delete` button deletes the currently viewed terminal.
The :guilabel:`Add printer` button will add a new printer field to the
pop-up.

.. _tlwebadm_terminal_properties:

.. table:: Terminal properties

   +------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
   | Name                   | Description                                |
   +========================+============================================+
   | Terminal name          | Name of the terminal. For example          |
   |                        | the terminal's DNS name or a name          |
   |                        | following a naming scheme that identifies  |
   |                        | the terminal.                              |
   +------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
   | Hardware (MAC) address | Hardware (MAC) address of the main         |
   |                        | interface of the terminal. This field is   |
   |                        | important! Without a correct value the     |
   |                        | *nearest* printer won't work!              |
   +------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
   | Location               | Which of the locations, entered in the     |
   |                        | Locations module, this terminal belongs    |
   |                        | to.                                        |
   +------------------------+--------------------------------------------+

It is also possible to add a printer to a terminal in the terminal
module. This can be used if a terminal has its own printer or is closer
to another printer than the ones assigned to this terminal's location.
You should use this feature moderately since it may cause more
administration.

To add a printer you do exactly as in the :guilabel:`Locations` menu.
Click the :guilabel:`Add printer` button, select the printer in the
drop-down menu and then press :guilabel:`Save` to make sure that the
settings are stored. To delete it, check the relevant :guilabel:`Delete`
checkbox(es) for the printer(s) you wish to remove, and click
:guilabel:`Save`.
