.. meta::
   :description: Manage profiles and introduction texts in the ThinLinc
                 web administration interface, including creating,
                 editing, and organizing user profiles and translations
                 for the profile chooser.

.. _tlwebadm_profiles:

The profiles module
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

On this page you can modify text shown in the profile chooser, and
manage profiles. You can create or delete a profile and configure the
profile order.

- :guilabel:`Introduction texts` allows you to modify and manage
  translation of texts used in the profile chooser.

- :guilabel:`Profile list` allows you to configure the available
  profiles and their order.

.. _tlwebadm_profiles_introductions_texts:

Introduction texts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:guilabel:`Introduction texts` contain translation tables for greetings
and introduction texts. There is also a configuration option to enable
or disable the use of introduction texts.

- :guilabel:`Greeting text` is the text to show at the top of the
  profile chooser.

- :guilabel:`Introduction text` is the text to show before presenting
  the list of profiles.

To add a new translation, fill in the language code and the translated
string. Click the :guilabel:`Save` button to save the new translation
and add it to the translation table.

To delete a translation select the row using the checkbox in
:guilabel:`Delete` column of the translation table. Click the
:guilabel:`Save` button to carry out the actual deletion of selected
rows.

.. _tlwebadm_profiles_profiles_list:

Profile list
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :guilabel:`Profile list` module contains functionality to manage
your profiles. You can change the default profile, create new or edit
existing profiles, or change the order of profiles.

- :guilabel:`Default profile` allows you to specify the default profile
  to be selected in the profile chooser.

- :guilabel:`Active profiles` allows you to modify active profiles and
  their order, or create new profiles. These are presented to the user
  in the same order as in the list. Note that other criteria must also
  be satisfied for a profile to be available to a user.

- :guilabel:`Inactive profiles` allows you to modify inactive
  profiles. These are not presented to the user.

Create a new profile by clicking the :guilabel:`Add new profile` button.
If you want to edit an existing profile, click the profile name in the
table of available profiles.

When creating a new or editing an existing profile a pop-up is displayed.
This pop-up is shared between both modes and each field details are
described below.

-  :guilabel:`Identification`

   A unique string identifier for the profile which is used when
   referencing this profile.

-  :guilabel:`Make profile available`

   This will make the profile available to be selected and used. If
   disabled it will not be shown to the user in the profile chooser.

-  :guilabel:`XDG session desktop`

   The system desktop session configuration that this profile should be
   connected to.

-  :guilabel:`Default name`

   A name for the profile which is displayed in the profile chooser.

-  :guilabel:`Take description from`

   The description is shown in the profile chooser when a profile is
   selected. This field can be a static text which is defined in the
   input field :guilabel:`Default description`.

   -  :guilabel:`Test command`: This will take and use the output of the
      defined :guilabel:`Test command` as the description for the
      profile.

   - :guilabel:`Manually defined text below`: This will use the text
     defined in the :guilabel:`Default description` field below.

-  :guilabel:`Default description`

   A text used as the description for the profile. This is text is used
   if :guilabel:`Take description from` above is selected to use the
   manually defined text.

-  :guilabel:`Icon path`

   A filename of the icon to use in the profile chooser.

-  :guilabel:`Screenshot path`

   A filename of the screenshot to use in the profile chooser.

-  :guilabel:`Command line`

   This command is used to start up a session. In most cases this is
   something simple like ``xfce4-session``, but in some cases there
   might also be arguments like
   ``gnome-session --session gnome-classic``.

-  :guilabel:`Test command`

   This command is evaluated and if it returns true, the profile is
   shown to the user. If the command evaluates as false, the profile
   will not be shown in the list of available profiles for the user.

   ThinLinc includes the tool :program:`tl-memberof-group` which may be
   used to test membership of groups. You can use this tool as a test
   command, such as ``/opt/thinlinc/bin/tl-memberof-group
   my_profile_access_group``. This example will give members of group
   ``my_profile_access_group`` access to the profile.

   If you only want to give a specific user access to the profile you
   may specify ``test ${USER} = user``.

When you have finished editing the fields, click :guilabel:`Save` button
at the bottom of the pop-up to save your changes into the configuration
file.

To delete a profile, click the profile name in the table of available
profiles. Then click the checkbox at the bottom of the pop-up to verify
your intention about deletion of the profile. Complete the deletion by
clicking the :guilabel:`Delete` button.
