.. meta::
   :description: Troubleshooting guide for ThinLinc, covering common
                 session issues, client errors, and session startup
                 problems. Includes general troubleshooting methods and
                 specific error resolution steps.

.. _troubleshoot:

Troubleshooting ThinLinc
========================

In this appendix, we will describe how to troubleshoot common problems
in a ThinLinc installation.

We will begin by giving a general view of the recommended
troubleshooting method, and then continue with more detailed
instructions for troubleshooting specific problems.

General troubleshooting method
------------------------------

In most cases, troubleshooting a ThinLinc session problem should follow
the method outlined in :numref:`troubleshoot-fig`.

.. _troubleshoot-fig:

.. figure:: images/troubleshoot.svg

   The general troubleshooting method

The method is to first check that the user was let in by SSH on the VSM
server. This information is found on different places on different
distributions. Common log filenames for SSH information are
:file:`/var/log/secure`, :file:`/var/log/auth.log` or
:file:`/var/log/daemon.log`. If the user was let in by SSH, the VSM
server log (:file:`/var/log/vsmserver.log`) is inspected. In some cases,
the reason for session failure can be found there, but most of the
time, it's necessary to find out which VSM agent was selected for the
session, and inspect the VSM agent log (:file:`/var/log/vsmagent.log`)
on the server in question.

If inspecting :file:`/var/log/vsmagent.log` on the server that was
selected for the session does not reveal the reason for the failure,
there is a per-session log in
:file:`/var/opt/thinlinc/sessions/<username>/last/xinit.log` where the
output of commands run during session startup is stored.

In very rare cases, it might also be necessary to inspect the SSH log on
the VSM agent.

Troubleshooting specific problems
---------------------------------

The first step should be to check if your specific problem is mentioned
in the platform-specific notes available at
https://www.cendio.com/thinlinc/docs/platforms. If your problem isn't
mentioned in the platform-specific notes you should read the sections
below.

Problems where the client reports an error
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the following sections, we will describe how to cope with problems
where the ThinLinc client is reporting an error.

Couldn't set up secure tunnel to ThinLinc server. (Couldn't establish SSH tunnel, SSH terminated.)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This error is caused by failure to connect to the SSH daemon on the
ThinLinc server (the server running the VSM server). This could be
caused by the fact that the SSH daemon is simply not running, or that it
is not letting the user in for some reason.

Another possible reason is that there is a firewall between the user and
the ThinLinc server, that forbids communication.

"Login failed! Wrong username or password."
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This error is very often caused simply by the user entering an incorrect
password. Begin by verifying that the user is actually entering the
correct username and password.

If the username and password are correct and this is the first time the
user tries to log in, check the SSH logs of the server. If SSH says that
the user is invalid, that means that something is incorrect in the
user's user information database entry. For example, this may happen if
a user stored in eDirectory has two ``cn`` attributes, one of them
different from the other.

The :command:`getent` command can be a valuable tool to dissect problems
of this type. If the output of :command:`getent passwd <username>`
doesn't produce any output, that is a sign that the user is in fact
invalid.

The SSH connection succeeded, but the ThinLinc server connection failed. Perhaps this server doesn't run a ThinLinc server?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This error is most often caused by the fact that the VSM server is not
running on the server. Start the VSM server and try again.

A user entering the wrong hostname, for example the hostname of one of
the VSM agents, would also get this error message. Check that the user
has entered the correct hostname. In very rare cases, this could also be
caused by incorrect DNS data.

ThinLinc login failed. (No agent server was available)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This error is reported if there were no working VSM agents available
according to the load balance information in the VSM server.

In a system with few VSM agent servers, restoring a VSM agent that has
been down for some reason doesn't take effect immediately --- the load
balance information is only updated once every 40 seconds by default.
Either wait for the load balance cycle to complete, or restart the VSM
server.

The load balance information can be inspected in the |tlwebadm|, or
using the |cmdline|.

.. |tlwebadm| replace::
   :ref:`ThinLinc Web Administration <tlwebadm_status>`
.. |cmdline| replace::
   :ref:`command line <cli_load>`

ThinLinc login failed. (Couldn't create your session)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When this error occurs, the user was valid on the VSM server, but for
some reason, the session couldn't be created on the VSM agent.

One very common reason for this problem is that the VSM agent has lost
its connection to the user database backend (LDAP, Windows domain or
other database), so the user exists on the VSM server, but not on the
VSM agent. If this is the case, the VSM agent log on the selected server
will clearly state that the user doesn't exist on the system.

Another very common reason is home directory trouble on the VSM agent.
Verify that the home directory exists on the selected server, and that
it is owned by the correct uidNumber/gidNumber. Of course, the user must
have write permissions in their home directory.

To verify that the home directory works, the following command can be
used:

.. code:: console

   $ ssh <username>@<agenthost> touch .

If the home directory is correctly mounted and writable by the user, the
above command will not produce any output except the password question.

Couldn't set up secure tunnel to VNC! (Couldn't establish SSH tunnel, SSH terminated.)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This error is caused by failure to connect to the SSH daemon on the
selected VSM agent. This could be caused by the fact that the SSH daemon
is simply not running, or that it is not letting the user in for some
reason.

Another possible reason is that there is a firewall between the user and
the selected VSM agent that disallows communication.

Problems that occur after session start
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this section we will discuss some problems that can occur after the
successful login, that is, after the ThinLinc login window has closed.
In this phase, a number of session startup problems can occur

Session starts, but closes down immediately
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the ThinLinc login window closes, and the session starts up but then
immediately shuts down, inspect :file:`xinit.log` found in
:file:`/var/opt/thinlinc/sessions/<username>/last/` on the selected VSM
agent. Some of the commands run during session startup will probably
have written an error message that will be stored in that file.

It may also be of value to inspect the VSM agent log on the selected
server.

At login, user is reconnected to previous, faulty, session
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If a previous session still exists and is faulty, for example because of
desktop environment failures, the user is reconnected to the same
session when logging in. Disconnect from the session, enable the
:guilabel:`End existing session` checkbox and log in again. That will
terminate the current session and start a new one.

Login succeeds, but the ThinLinc desktop configuration fails
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When using the ThinLinc desktop customizer, as documented in
:ref:`tldc`, the KDE or Gnome menu and the entries on the desktop
are customized at each login. If this fails, quota problems are very
often the problem. Check the quota of the user in question.

Login succeeds, but KDE fails to start
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If KDE fails to start, complaining about being unable to create symlinks
and similar, quota problems are commonly the problem. Check the quota of
the user in question.
